hi there's a small part of guitar wreck
my Chet Atkins
you'll notice when I played this piece
and I just have bare fingers and a bare
thumb and that the basses don't really
make a sound
they're down they don't ring that's one
particular kind of picking it's often
called Travis picking people often play
this with a thumb pick as well so what
is the difference between using bare
fingers and finger picks when do we use
one and not the other I think it's
mostly a case of preference but there
are a definite difference between the
two sounds and different ways that
they're used in that last piece I was
down being heavily with my part of the
right hand and using a bare thumb but of
course very great players like Chet
Atkins and Tommy Emmanuel and Doc Watson
do the same thing with a finger pick
with a thumb pick watch my hands in
closer as I perform this technique and
you see what I mean by damping the bass
strings with the palm of my hand
I'll play that little piece of Travis
picking again and notice how the heel of
my picking hand is always in contact
with the first two or three bass strings
making a thumping sound instead of
letting the ring
if we separate out the alternating bass
we can hear that characteristic chunk
chunk chunk the muted bass sounds of the
Travis picking style watch while I play
a part of deep river blues by Doc Watson
it's the same kind of Travis picking
style that sometimes the bass notes are
not damped they're damped now and again
to cause the right effect
now thumb big is a natural amplifier
when I hit the strings of a thumb pick
let it ring
particularly on the good guitar like
this small bodied Martin it makes quite
a nice bluesy sound when this is joined
by the finger pick that I use which is a
steel finger pig then it makes quite an
impressive stamp but it can be very
harsh as you can hear particular there
the metal finger pick hits listen the
metal strings take a look in close-up
and you'll see how I use the thumb pick
and the finger pick
you
ah
the last clip showed how I use a thumb
pick and a finger pick to play a blues
in a it gives it a particular flavor and
some flexibility makes it Lively
in the next clip I'm going to use the
finger pick in the way that Big Bill
Broonzy used his thumb which was to
spread it across two or three bass
strings to make this thrumming sound
characteristic of big Bill's playing
this is a little piece of a song by
Leroy car called how long blues and this
is a great example of how I can use the
finger pick and the thumb pick to
different effects to create a nice sound
so you can see even with a quite a
simple blue Sun like a lone Blues there
are quite a few things happening for
example the basses I'm stumbling the
basses with my thumb pick so instead of
just hitting I'm stumbling from the base
E which makes it a little bit more
complicated and syncopated and more
interesting which is really important we
need to make the music interesting so
people want to listen to it the other
thing is that with my steel finger pick
often I don't just hit one note you'll
see when I start to play this song the
finger pick moves across two or three
treble strings
it fills out the sound it makes it
broader and again more interesting there
are many ways to play the guitar many
ways to finger pick and whether to use
finger picks or not it's just one of the
choices that we need to make but maybe
we need to consider using both kinds of
style for the different songs that we
want to perform have a good time keep on
picking I'll see you next time
let it rain let it pour
let the rain now some more and I got
them Deep River blue
let the rain come down now let the wind
just hit the ground I got them Deep
River Blues